# MAGIC Gamma Telescope Classification
The project applies machine learning classification on the MAGIC Gamma Telescope dataset to distinguish between high energy Gamma particles and the background Hadronic Shower. The problem is formulated as a Binary Classification Problem.

# Overview of the Problem

The data are Monte Carlo generated to simulate the registration of high energy gamma particles in the ground-based atmospheric Cherenkov gamma telescope using imaging technique.
When high-energy gamma rays enter the atmosphere, they initiate electromagnetic showers. Charged particles within these showers emit Cherenkov radiation (visible to UV wavelengths). This radiation leaks through the atmosphere and is recorded by photomultiplier tubes in the telescope's camera. 
In the generation of this dataset, researchers applied Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to the camera plane to derive the characteristics of the elongated cluster images. These features are known as Hillas parameters (e.g., image extent, asymmetry, and total depositions).


# Dataset
The data set was generated by a Monte Carlo program, Corsika, described in:
    D. Heck et al., CORSIKA, A Monte Carlo code to simulate extensive air showers,
    Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe FZKA 6019 (1998).
http://rexa.info/paper?id=ac6e674e9af20979b23d3ed4521f1570765e8d68

The program was run with parameters allowing to observe events with energies down to below 50 GeV.

The Dataset has no missing values.

Instances: 19020 <br> 
Number of features: 10 <br>

### Variable table
<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Variable Name</th>
    <th>Role</th>
    <th>Type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fLength</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>major axis of ellipse</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fWidth</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>minor axis of ellipse</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fSize</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>10-log of sum of content of all pixels</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fConc</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>ratio of sum of two highest pixels over fSize</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fConc1</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>ratio of highest pixel over fSize</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fAsym</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>distance from highest pixel to center, projected onto major axis</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fM3Long</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>3rd root of third moment along major axis</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fM3Trans</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>3rd root of third moment along minor axis</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fAlpha</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>angle of major axis with vector to origin</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>fDist</td>
    <td>Feature</td>
    <td>Continuous</td>
    <td>distance from origin to center of ellipse</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>class</td>
    <td>Target</td>
    <td>Binary</td>
    <td>gamma (signal), hadron (background)</td>
  </tr>
</table>
<br>
*We have excluded the units for some of the features noted in the table above

## License
This dataset is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) license.

This allows for the sharing and adaptation of the datasets for any purpose, provided that the appropriate credit is given.
# Methodology
1. We first mapped the class variable into binary integers and then split the data into Training set(60%), Validation Set(20%) and a Test Set(20%).
2. Standardization was applied to all the features
3. The minority class in the training set was oversampled using `Random Over-Sampling` (RandomOverSampler) to prevent model bias toward the dominant class.
<br>
**In the real data, the h class represents the majority class

# Models Evaluated
1. k Nearest Neighbors: Tuned to 5 neighbors 
2. Naive Bayes: Gaussian Naive Bayes Classifier
3. Logistic regression: Standard Logistic regressor
4. Support Vector Machine Classifier:
5. Neural Network: 5 layer Neural network with 2 Dense layers with variable neurons nad ReLu activation, 2 Dropout layer and 1 output Dense layer with sigmoid activation. <br> We performed a grid search to further tune the hyperparameters of the neural network.

# Empirical Results
<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Classifier</th>
    <th>Test Accuracy</th>
    <th>F1- Score (Gamma)</th>
    <th>F1- Score (Hadron)</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Neural Network</td>
    <td>87%</td>
    <td>0.81</td>
    <td>0.91</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Support Vector Machine</td>
    <td>85%</td>
    <td>0.79</td>
    <td>0.89</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>k Nearest Neighbors</td>
    <td>81%</td>
    <td>0.72</td>
    <td>0.85</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Logistic Regression</td>
    <td>79%</td>
    <td>0.70</td>
    <td>0.83</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Naive Bayes</td>
    <td>72%</td>
    <td>0.51</td>
    <td>0.81</td>
  </tr>
</table>

# Citation
Bock, R. (2004). MAGIC Gamma Telescope [Dataset]. UCI Machine Learning Repository. https://doi.org/10.24432/C52C8B.

# Conclusion
In this study, we systematiclly evaluated variouos classification architectures in order to distinguish between the high energy Gamma particles and the background Hadronic showers. The results confirm that Neural Network with it's non-linear feature mapping capabilities, achieves the highest classification accuracy of 87% in contrast to the traditional models in k Nearest Neighbors and Naive Bayes. <br> This is indicative of complex non-linear relationships between the Hillas parameters are best captured by the high-capacity models.

## Accessing the Code
The full analysis and model training can be found in the [notebook/MAGIC_Gamma_Telescope.ipynb](notebook/MAGIC_Gamma_Telescope.ipynb) file.
